<!-- metadata: date="2026-06-11"; chapter="12"; type="source"; title="Source: BI-1 Lecture"; description="Source material for chapter 12" -->

Improving
Business
Performance with
Information
Technologies

BITM 330

Prof. Nim Dvir

Database Concepts

Ninth Edition

Chapter 7
Data Warehouses, Business
Intelligence Systems, and Big Data

Slide in this Presentation Contain Hyperlinks. JAWS users should be
able to get a list of links by using INSERT+F7

Copyright © 2020, 2017, 2015 Pearson Education, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Did you do the reading?

A. Yes
B. No

Learning Objectives

• Learn the basic concepts of data warehouses and

data marts

• Learn the basic concepts of dimensional

databases

• Learn the basic concepts of business intelligence

(B I) systems

• Learn the basic concepts of online analytical

processing (O L A P)

• Learn the basic concepts of virtualization and

virtual machines

Learning Objectives

• Learn the basic concepts of cloud computing

• Learn the basic concepts of Big Data, structured

storage, and the MapReduce process

• Understand the limitations and tradeoffs of

replicated, partitioned stores as indicated by the C
A P (Consistency, Availability, Partition Tolerance)
theorem

• Learn the basic concepts of JavaScript Object

Notation (J S O N) as a way of structuring
nonrelational data

What Is Big Data?

• Big Data is the current term for the
enormous datasets generated by
applications such as search tools like
Google and Bing

• Web 2.0 social networks include:

– Facebook
– LinkedIn
– Twitter

Storage Capacity Terms

Heather Sweeney Designs: Database
Design

Note: From Chapter 5 showing the final database design for Heather Sweeney

The H S D Database Diagram

Business Intelligence Systems

• Business intelligence (B I) systems are

information systems that:

– assist managers and other professionals in the
analysis of current and past activities and in
the prediction of future events

– do not support operational activities, such as

the recording and processing of orders
▪ these are supported by transaction

processing systems

– support management assessment, analysis,

planning and control

Business Intelligence Systems

• B I systems fall into two broad categories:
– reporting systems that sort, filter,

group, and make elementary
calculations on operational data

– data mining applications that perform

sophisticated analyses on data; analyses
that usually involve complex statistical
and mathematical processing

Characteristics of Business
Intelligence Applications

B I Terms

• Online analytical processing (O L A P) is
the processing of non-operational data
used in data mining and other applications

• Data lake is a repository that includes all
data relevant to a business (re: photos,
documents, other files of any type)

• A data warehouse is a database system

that has data, programs, and personnel that
specialize in the preparation of data for B I
processing.

The Relationship Between
Operational and B I Applications

Components of a Data Warehouse

Problems with Operational Data

• “Dirty data,” examples include:

– “G” for gender
– “213” for age

• Missing values

• Inconsistent data

– data that has changed (ex: customer’s phone number)

• Nonintegrated data (data from multiple sources)

• Incorrect format (ex: too many or not enough digits

• Too much data (ex: an excess number of columns)

The ETL Process
• ETL, which stands for extract, transform, and load, is
the process data engineers use to extract data from
different sources, transform the data into a usable and
trusted resource, and load that data into the systems
end-users can access and use downstream to solve
business problems.

E T L Data Transformation

• Data may need to be transformed for use in a data warehouse.

For example:

– {CountryCode → CountryName}
– “U S” → “United States”
– Email address to Email domain

▪ joe@somewhere.com → “somewhere.com”

Data Warehouses Versus Data Marts

• A data mart is a collection of data that
is smaller than the data warehouse
that addresses a specific component

• An enterprise data warehouse (E D
W) architecture is when a data mart
is combined with the data warehouse
architecture.

Data Warehouses and Data Marts

Characteristics of Operational and
Dimensional Databases

• A dimensional database is a design used for
efficient analysis and efficient queries for data
warehouses.

• Uses a star-schema with a fact table at the center

(fully normalized) and a dimensional table
radiating out from the center (may be non-
normalized)

• May use slowly changing dimensions to track

data such as a date or time dimension.

Characteristics of Operational and
Dimensional Databases

• A dimension is a structure that categorizes facts
and measures in order to enable users to answer
business questions.

• Commonly used dimensions are people,

products, place and time.

Characteristics of Operational and
Dimensional Databases

• A dimension table is a table in a star

schema of a data warehouse.

• A dimension table stores attributes, or

dimensions, that describe the objects in a
fact table.

• In data warehousing, a dimension is a

collection of reference information about a
measurable event.

Characteristics of Operational and
Dimensional Databases

• In a data warehouse, dimensions provide

structured labeling information to otherwise
unordered numeric measures.

• The dimension is a data set composed of

individual, non-overlapping data elements.

• The primary functions of dimensions are

threefold: to provide filtering, grouping and
labelling.

Characteristics of Operational and
Dimensional Databases

Operational Database

Dimensional Database

Used for structured
transaction data processing

Used for unstructured
analytical data

Current data are used

Data are inserted, updated,
and deleted by users

Current and historical
data are used

Data are loaded and
updated
systematically, not by
users

A Star Schema

1.

In computing, the star schema is the
simplest style of data mart schema
and is the approach most widely used
to develop data warehouses and
dimensional data marts.

2. The star schema consists of one or
more fact tables referencing any
number of dimension tables.

A Star Schema

The H S D –D W Star Schema

The H S D –D W SQL Create Table Statements

The H S D –D W Table Data

A Query to Summarize Products Sold
by Customer and Product

• The following SQL code is used to summarize products sold by

Customer and Product

The H S D –D W Query Results: Summarize Product Units Sold by
Customer and Product

The Two-Dimensional
ProductNumber-CustomerID Matrix

The Three-Dimensional Time-
ProductNumber-CustomerID Cube

R F M Analysis

RFM analysis is a marketing technique used
to quantitatively rank and group
customers based on the recency, frequency
and monetary total of their recent
transactions to identify the best customers
and perform targeted marketing campaigns.

The H S D –D W Star Schema Extended
for R F M Analysis

Online Analytical Processing (O L A P)

• Online Analytical Processing (O L A P) is
a technique for dynamically examining
database data:
– O L A P uses arithmetic functions such as

Sum and Average

– O L A P uses the dimensional database

model

Online Analytical Processing (O L A P)

• O L A P systems produce O L A P reports

(also called O L A P cube)
– An O L A P report uses inputs call

dimensions

– An O L A P report calculates outputs

called measures

– Excel PivotTables can be used to create

O L A P reports

S Q L Query for O L A P Data

SQL View for O L A P Data

The H S D-D W Query for O L A P Results:
Time-Product-Customer Cube

The H S D-D W O L A P ProductNumber
by City Report

The H S D –D W O L A P ProductNumber
by City Report: CustomerName and
Year Dimensions Added

The H S D –D W O L A P City by
ProductNumber, CustomerName, and
Year Report

Distributed Database Processing

• A distributed database is a database that is stored and

processed on more than one computer.

• A service cluster is a group of associated servers where
the database shared between them is called a distributed
database.

• A database is distributed when it is:

– partitioned
– replicated
– both partitioned and replicated

• Databases are distributed for two major reasons –

performance and control.

Types of Distributed Databases

Object-Relational Databases

• Object-oriented programming (O O P) is a

methodology for designing and writing computer
programs.

• Some object-oriented programming languages

are Java, Python, C++, C#, and Visual Basic.NET

• Objects are data structures that have both

methods (programs that perform some task with
the object) and properties (data items particular
to an object).

• Object persistence is the permanent storing of
values of properties of an object in secondary
memory (usually disk)

Virtualization

• Virtualization is using hardware and software to

simulate another hardware resource.

• Virtualization is done by having one physical

computer host one or more virtual computers, also
known as virtual machines.

• The host machine runs a special program known
as a virtual machine manager or hypervisor.

• There are two ways to implement hypervisors:
– “bare metal” or type 1 (used in large data

centers)

– “hosted” or type 2 (used by students and others)

Cloud Computing

• Cloud computing services are ultimately provided by large data

centers.

• Storage area networks (S A N s) have dedicated network paths from
servers to disk arrays, where several  physical disks are combined
together to act as a single, larger disk.

• Redundant arrays of independent disks (R A I D) can be configured

for maximum access speed or for reliability.

• Three basic ways to lease cloud services:

– Software as a service (SaaS), Ex: Salesforce.com
– Platform as a service (PaaS), Ex: operating systems, software

development tools & system programs provided

– Infrastructure as a service (IaaS), Ex: Only hardware provided

and users manage their own software

The C A P Theorem

• The C A P theorem defines three properties of

distributed database systems:

– Consistency means that all database replicas
see the same data at any given point in time

– Availability means that every request

received by a server will result in a response,
as long as the network is available

– Partition tolerance means that the distributed
database can continue to operate even when
the cluster is partitioned by network failures
into two or more disconnected sections
(partitions)

The C A P Theorem—You Can’t Have
All Three at the Same Time!

MapReduce and Hadoop

• MapReduce is a technique to analyze

extremely large datasets by breaking down
tasks and assigning them to a cluster of
computers and then combine them into the
final product of the original task.

• Hadoop Distributed File System (H D F S)
provides standard file services to clustered
servers so their file systems can function as
one distributed, replicated file system that
can support large-scale MapReduce
processing.

MapReduce

ASSIGNMENT 6 – A DUE
BY 11/22 (EOD)

•Capstone 7
•Capstone 10 –
Specialty

ASSIGNMENT 6 – B (DUE
BY 11/29 EOD)

• Answer the case questions at the
end of chapter 6 and the end of
chapter 7 for Marcia’s Dry
Cleaning.

• See the database that is uploaded in

this content folder.

• Make sure to answer both the case

question s from chapter 6 and
chapter 7, all under the case study of
Marcia’s Dry Cleaning.

• We will go over the questions and

the instructions in depth during class
-- make sure to attend!

• Submit your answers in one file,

preferably a .pdf.

QUIZ 7 -
(DUE BY
11/22 EOD)

NO LABS
NEXT WEEK!

NEXT
TUESDAY IS
ON ZOOM!

